closes [Concept Entry] Go: Functions #1242 (#1526)
Codecademy/docs: content/go/concepts/functions/functions.md

---
Title: 'Functions'

> Description: 'Functions are a block of code that can be reused multiple times'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Description: 'Functions are a block of code that can be reused multiple times.'
```

Subjects:
  - 'Code Foundations'
  - 'Computer Science'
Tags:
  - 'Functions'
  - 'Methods'
  - 'Anonymous Functions'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-go'
  - 'paths/computer-science'
  - 'paths/back-end-engineer-career-path'
---

**Functions** are a block of code that can be reused multiple times.

> Functions are defined using the func keyword, followed by the function name, parameters, and return type. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Functions are defined using the `func` keyword, followed by the function name, parameters, and return type. 
```

The parameter names and result names must be either all present or all absent.
Pass by value is used for parameters, meaning the function receives a copy of the parameter's value. To modify the parameter, pass a pointer.

> ## Syntax

Reviewer: Let's move lines 18-20 to this syntax section after the ```pseudo code block.

Syntax for a function in Go is as follows:

```pseudo
func functionName(parameter type)(resultReturn type){
    return value
}
```

## Examples

> ```go

Reviewer: Each example should be introduced by a sentence summarizing what the example does.

package main

import (
	"fmt"
)

// we can omit the paranthesis if there is only one parameter
func Hello(name string) string {
	return "check me i dont have parenthesis around my return see " + name
}

func MultipleReturns(a int64, b int64) (int64, int64) {
	return a + b, a - b
}

func MultipleReturns2(a int64, b int64) (c int64, d int64) {
	x, y := a+b, a-b
	c = x
	d = y
	return // dont have to specify the return names if we are using named return values in func definition
}

// passing a function as a parameter
func printResult(f func(int64, int64) (int64, int64), a int64, b int64) {
	c, d := f(a, b)
	fmt.Println(c, d)
}

// functions can return functions as well!
func returnFunc() func() {
	return func() {
		fmt.Println("Hey I am a function returned by function sounds cool right?")
	}
}

func main() {
	returnFunc()()
	printResult(MultipleReturns, 10, 3)
	fmt.Println(Hello("nice right"))
	fmt.Println(MultipleReturns(10, 3))
	fmt.Println(MultipleReturns2(10, 3))
}

```

> output is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output is:
```

```bash
Hey I am a function returned by function sounds cool right?
13 7
check me i dont have parenthesis around my return see nice right
13 7
13 7

Program exited.
```

> Note:Functions must be directly declared at package level, not inside other functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** Functions must be directly declared at package level, not inside other functions.
```

```go
package main

import "fmt"

func main() {
	func name() {
		fmt.Println("hey")
	}()
}

```

```bash
./prog.go:6:7: syntax error: unexpected name, expecting (
./prog.go:8:3: syntax error: unexpected ( after top level declaration

Go build failed.
```

> we can define a function inside a function but it is not recommended as we can't call it outside the function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can define a function inside a function but it is not recommended as we can't call it outside the function.
```

Author: ok will either add explaination or merge both statements

```go
package main

import "fmt"

func main() {
	func() {
		fmt.Println("Hey I am no name")
	}()
	greeting := "hey I am no name"
	//greeting can be accessed inside of nested functions and can be changed
	//or assign it to a variable to make it reusable
	secondWay := func(name string) {
		greeting = "Hey " + name

	}
	secondWay("Pavan")
	fmt.Println(greeting)

}

```
output is 

```bash
Hey I am no name
Hey Pavan

Program exited.
```

## Anonymous Functions

Anonymous functions are similar to normal functions, but do not have a name. They can be called immediately after being defined.
Anyonymous functions can be passed as parameter to another function.
They are also called closures/functions literals.

> Each function can have at most one variadic parameter(keys ...int).

Author: this i will update after getting clear ans to https://github.com/Codecademy/docs/pull/1526#discussion_r1085731909

The type of a variadic parameter is always a slice type.

> think about it we have been using a function that takes vardiac parameters..

Author: gotcha i wasn't able to frame a sentence on it without using a perspective , can u guide me here pls @SSwiniarski

> think about it we have been using a function that takes vardiac parameters..

Author: here i will just delete tht sentence ig

yaa the built-in fuction Println is an example of vardiac function.

> Println is a variadic function refer [here](https://golang.org/pkg/fmt/#Println)

Author: so should i remove 157 and 159 lines? one refer to go docs and one to direct code on how print is defined

> Println is a variadic function refer [here](https://golang.org/pkg/fmt/#Println)

Reviewer: @Pavan-Nambi remove the lines with third party links. Include any needed detail in the entry itself.

> Println is a variadic function refer [here](https://golang.org/pkg/fmt/#Println)

Author: gotcha i will just include basic syntax of  how it was implemented under the hood

for more specific information [here](https://cs.opensource.google/go/go/+/refs/tags/go1.19.5:src/fmt/print.go;l=293)

```go

> // You can edit this code!

Reviewer: Remove the first two comments

// Click here and start typing.
package main

import "fmt"

func main() {

	x, y := func() (int, int) {
		fmt.Println("This function has no parameters.")
		return 3, 4
	}()
	fmt.Println(x, y) //3 and 4

	func() {
		fmt.Println("x*y =", x*y)
	}()

	// The following anonymous function have no results. so it can be omitted

	func(a, b int) { // equivalent to func(a int,b int)
		println("a+b =", a+b)
	}(x, y)

> 

Reviewer: Remove the extra line breaks. Don't have multiple line breaks in a row in the code examples.

	func(keys ...int) { // variadic parameters
		for _, key := range keys {
			fmt.Println(key)
		}
	}(1, 2, 3, 4, 5)// can pass any number of arguments

}

```

> output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example produces the following output:
```

```bash
This function has no parameters.
3 4
x*y = 12
a+b = 7
1
2
3
4
5

Program exited.
```

### Methods

> A function is called a method if it is defined with a receiver.

Reviewer: This all reads as one paragraph. It would be clearer if the following lines were a bulleted list.

A receiver is a parameter that is declared before the function name.
The receiver can be of any type, including a struct type.
Receiver can be a pointer or a value.
If the receiver is a pointer, the function can modify the value to which the receiver points.
If the receiver is a value, the function can modify a copy of the value to which the receiver points.

**_implicit dereferencing_** refers to the automatic process of taking the address of a value and passing a pointer to a method when a method with a pointer receiver is called on that value.

> In go complier does this automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In go the complier does this automatically.
```

> ```go

Reviewer: Introduce the examples with a summary sentence.

> // You can edit this code!

Reviewer: Remove the first two comments.

// Click here and start typing.
package main

import (
	"fmt"
)

type student struct {
	name  string
	email string
}

func (s student) passyByValue(name string) {
	s.name = name
}
func (s *student) passByRef(email string) {
	s.email = email
}
func main() {
	s := student{"pavan", "pavan@example.com"}
	fmt.Println("initially", s)
	s.passyByValue("xyz")
	fmt.Println("after pass by value", s)
	s.passByRef("pooja@example.com")
	// equivalent to (&s).passByRef
	// this is because the compiler will automatically convert s to &s implicit dereferencing
	fmt.Println("after pass by reference", s)

> 

Reviewer: Remove the extra line breaks.

}
```

> output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example results in the following output:
```

Program exited.
```

- Value semantics is appropriate when the data is safe to be copied, In this case, passing a copy of the data to a function or method is sufficient and can improve performance by avoiding the overhead of passing a pointer.

- Pointer semantics is appropriate when the data is not safe to be copied, In this case, passing a pointer to the data allows the function or method to modify the original data, and the changes will be reflected.
  Using pointers is more efficient when dealing with large data structures, as it avoids the cost of copying the entire data structure , but pointers add complexity to the program.

### points to remember

names of the functions must be unique in the package scope exceptions for this are init and using blank identifier(these can never be called directly they are only used to implement interfaces or provide helper functionality.)
reasons to use blank identifier is for better readability and to say that this function is not meant to be called directly from outside the package

<!-- TODO: update link here after interfaces in go is done or make a example here with interfaces need opinion of someone -->

> Another usecase for blank identifier is to implement interfaces which can be covered in interfaces section

Reviewer: Also move this to the end of line 279 above.

init function is called before main function and can be called multiple times

### Example

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
)

func init() {
	fmt.Println("Initializing package main")
}

func init() {
	fmt.Println("Initializing package main again")
}

func main() {
	fmt.Println("Hello, World!")
	_init()
}
func _init() {
	fmt.Println("Initializing package main!!")
}

```

> Output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example results in the following output:
```

```bash
Initializing package main
Initializing package main again
Hello, World!
Initializing package main!!

Program exited.
```

> use below codebyte to practice in broswer while learning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Codebyte Example

The following example is runnable and can be edited:

```

## Syntax

Syntax for a function in Go is as follows:

```pseudo
func functionName(parameter type)(resultReturn type){
    return value
}
```

The parameter names and result names must be either all present or all absent.
Pass by value is used for parameters, meaning the function receives a copy of the parameter's value. To modify the parameter, pass a pointer.

Below are some examples of how to define functions in Go:

## Examples

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
)

// we can omit the paranthesis if there is only one parameter
func Hello(name string) string {
	return "check me i dont have parenthesis around my return see " + name
}

func MultipleReturns(a int64, b int64) (int64, int64) {
	return a + b, a - b
}

func MultipleReturns2(a int64, b int64) (c int64, d int64) {
	x, y := a+b, a-b
	c = x
	d = y
	return // dont have to specify the return names if we are using named return values in func definition
}

// passing a function as a parameter
func printResult(f func(int64, int64) (int64, int64), a int64, b int64) {
	c, d := f(a, b)
	fmt.Println(c, d)
}

// functions can return functions as well!
func returnFunc() func() {
	return func() {

> 		fmt.Println("Hey I am a function returned by function sounds cool right?")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		fmt.Println("This is a function returned by another function.")
```

	}
}

func main() {
	returnFunc()()
	printResult(MultipleReturns, 10, 3)
	fmt.Println(Hello("nice right"))
	fmt.Println(MultipleReturns(10, 3))
	fmt.Println(MultipleReturns2(10, 3))
}

```
The output is:

```bash
Hey I am a function returned by function sounds cool right?
13 7
check me i dont have parenthesis around my return see nice right
13 7
13 7

Program exited.
```

> **Note:** Functions must be directly declared at package level, not inside other functions.

```go
package main

import "fmt"

func main() {
	func name() {
		fmt.Println("hey")
	}()
}

```

```bash
./prog.go:6:7: syntax error: unexpected name, expecting (
./prog.go:8:3: syntax error: unexpected ( after top level declaration

Go build failed.
```

There is a way to define a function inside a function as below:

```go
package main

import "fmt"

func main() {
	func() {

> 		fmt.Println("Hey I am no name")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		fmt.Println("Hey, I have no name")
```

	}()

> 	greeting := "hey I am no name"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	greeting := "Hey, there."
```

	//greeting can be accessed inside of nested functions and can be changed
	//or assign it to a variable to make it reusable
	secondWay := func(name string) {
		greeting = "Hey " + name

	}
	secondWay("Pavan")
	fmt.Println(greeting)

}

```
output is 

```bash

> Hey I am no name

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Hey, I have no name
```

- Pointer semantics is appropriate when the data is not safe to be copied. In this case, passing a pointer to the data allows the function or method to modify the original data.Using pointers is more efficient when dealing with large data structures, as it avoids the cost of copying the entire data structure. However, pointers add complexity to the program.

The `init` function is called before the `main` function and can be called multiple times

Below is an example with the `init` function:

### Example

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
)

func init() {
	fmt.Println("Initializing package main")
}

func init() {
	fmt.Println("Initializing package main again")
}

func main() {
	fmt.Println("Hello, World!")
	_init()
}
func _init() {
	fmt.Println("Initializing package main!!")
}

```

This example results in the following output:

```bash
Initializing package main
Initializing package main again
Hello, World!
Initializing package main!!

Program exited.
```

## Codebyte Example

> The following example is runnable and can be edited:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following codebyte example provides another example of a function. It is runnable and can be edited:
```

```codebyte/golang
package main

import (
	"fmt"
)

func Hello(name string) string {
	return "Hello " + name
}
func main() {

> 	fmt.Println(Hello("World"))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	fmt.Println(Hello("World!"))
```

	secondWay := func(name string) {
		greeting = "Hey " + name

	}
	secondWay("Pavan")
	fmt.Println(greeting)

}

```
output is 

```bash
Hey I am no name
Hey Pavan

Program exited.
```

## Anonymous Functions

Anonymous functions are similar to normal functions, but do not have a name. They can be called immediately after being defined.
Anyonymous functions can be passed as parameter to another function.
They are also called closures/functions literals.

Below is an example of an anonymous function:

```go

package main

import "fmt"

func main() {

	x, y := func() (int, int) {
		fmt.Println("This function has no parameters.")
		return 3, 4
	}()
	fmt.Println(x, y) //3 and 4

	func() {
		fmt.Println("x*y =", x*y)
	}()

	// The following anonymous function have no results. so it can be omitted

	func(a, b int) { // equivalent to func(a int,b int)
		println("a+b =", a+b)
	}(x, y)

	func(keys ...int) { // variadic parameters
		for _, key := range keys {
			fmt.Println(key)
		}
	}(1, 2, 3, 4, 5)// can pass any number of arguments

}

```

This example produces the following output:

```bash
This function has no parameters.
3 4
x*y = 12
a+b = 7
1
2
3
4
5

Program exited.
```

> ### Vardiac parameters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Vardiac parameters
```

Each function can have at most one variadic parameter(keys ...int).
The type of a variadic parameter is always a slice type.

Println is a variadic function

This snippet shows how println is defined under the hood in go

```
// Println formats using the default formats for its operands and writes to standard output.
// Spaces are always added between operands and a newline is appended.
// It returns the number of bytes written and any write error encountered.
func Println(a ...any) (n int, err error) {
	return Fprintln(os.Stdout, a...)
}
```

> 

Reviewer: Remove the extra two line breaks.

> ### Methods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Methods
```
